Authoring tools in dosho
=========================

Why a Python cab format, not cult-cargo's YAML?
--------------------------------------------------

cult-cargo and scabha did the real work of cataloguing this ecosystem's
tools first, and ``dosho`` leans on that prior art throughout -- this is
a new repository, not a rejection of the old one. ``dosho`` exists
because cult-cargo's cab YAML format -- built for Stimela 2.0/scabha --
carries assumptions shinobi deliberately doesn't carry forward:
``dynamic_schema`` (a Python function imported and *executed* at
cab-load time to compute a real tool's schema), package-scoped
``_include`` composition, and dtype coverage gaps that silently degrade
to ``str``. Every tool in ``dosho`` is instead authored directly in
Python, using shinobi's existing typed schema machinery -- no YAML
dialect, and none should be added.

Two shapes: ``Cab`` and pystep
--------------------------------

Not every tool can be a :class:`~shinobi.Cab`. shinobi only ever executes
``flavour="binary"`` cabs -- real standalone executables, argv-built and
shelled out to. A tool that's actually a Python-package function call
with no standalone binary at all (CASA tasks are the running example:
``casatasks.listobs``, ``casaplotms.plotms``) is instead a
:func:`@shinobi.pystep <shinobi.pystep>`-decorated function, producing a
``StepRef`` rather than a ``Cab``.

That's architecturally distinct from, and doesn't violate, "never import
a cab package": a pystep's ``ctx.import_func("<task>", "<package>")``
imports *inside the running container, at step-execution time*, calling
a real Python function the pystep author wrote directly into trusted
source -- not shinobi interpreting untrusted cab data on the host at
load time.

Both shapes live side by side under ``dosho/cabs/``, and both are
first-class for :meth:`Recipe.add_step <shinobi.Recipe.add_step>` -- a
caller doesn't need to know or care which one a given tool is.

Defining a ``Cab``
--------------------

:func:`dosho.define_cab` wraps ``Cab(...)`` and
:func:`shinobi.loaders.build_model` to remove the boilerplate of
hand-transcribing a real tool's parameter list from a flat
``{raw_param_name: (dtype, required, default)}`` dict -- the shape a
tool's own ``--help``/docs naturally give you:

.. code-block:: python

    from shinobi.steps.schema import ParamMeta

    from dosho import define_cab, images

    cab = define_cab(
        "mytool",
        "mytool",
        images.MYTOOL,
        {
            "data-ms": ("MS", True, None),
            "out-name": ("str", False, "out"),
            # a field whose CLI needs more than the bare triple carries its
            # ParamMeta as the spec's optional 4th element:
            "prefix": ("str", True, None, ParamMeta(nom_de_guerre="name")),
        },
        outputs={
            "image": ("File", False, None, ParamMeta(implicit="{prefix}-image.fits")),
        },
    )

Hyphenated/dotted raw names are sanitised to valid pydantic field names,
with the original kept as a ``nom_de_guerre`` so the built cab's argv
still uses the tool's real flag; an explicit ``ParamMeta`` that doesn't
set its own ``nom_de_guerre`` keeps the auto-derived one. Raw
``Cab(...)`` construction stays fully available for anything the helper
doesn't cover.

Choices and CLI abbreviations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A field's ``ParamMeta`` can also carry ``choices`` and ``abbreviation``,
both threaded through :func:`shinobi.loaders.build_model` by
``define_cab``:

* ``choices=[...]`` narrows the built model's field to
  ``typing.Literal[*choices]``, so an out-of-set value fails real pydantic
  validation rather than only being documented in ``info`` text. Every
  field default must be a member of the set (or ``None``).
* ``abbreviation="xy"`` attaches a ``json_schema_extra`` hint so
  ``ninja run`` can offer a single-dash short alias (``--long-flag/-xy``)
  alongside the generated long flag. It never changes the argv the tool
  itself receives -- that still uses ``nom_de_guerre``.

.. code-block:: python

    "mode": ("str", False, "clean", ParamMeta(choices=["dirty", "clean", "predict"])),
    "ascii-sky": ("File", False, None, ParamMeta(abbreviation="as")),

Dynamic per-instance parameter families
------------------------------------------

Some real tools have parameter names that depend on a caller-chosen
value, not a fixed field set -- CubiCal's ``g1-solvable``/``g-time-int``,
QuartiCal's ``K.time_interval``, one family per solvable-term name chosen
per pipeline call. shinobi's :class:`~shinobi.steps.schema.ParamPattern`
expresses this declaratively: a hand-authored table of the real, known
attrs (transcribed once from the tool's own docs/template), plus a
regex-matched wildcard segment for the caller-chosen term name -- static
data, never generated by importing/executing the tool's own schema
function. See ``dosho/cabs/cubical.py``/``quartical.py`` for real
examples.

Dynamic output paths
----------------------

Some tools' output *paths* depend on other resolved input values --
WSClean's ``{prefix}-MFS-image.fits``-shaped outputs, for example. A
``ParamMeta.implicit`` string template, resolved via plain
``str.format`` against a step's own validated inputs (never ``eval``,
never an expression language), covers exactly this. Only the handful of
outputs a real pipeline actually wires as a dependency need a resolved
``implicit`` template; anything more exotic (WSClean's open-ended
per-band/per-interval combinatorics) stays validation-only via
``output_patterns``. See ``dosho/cabs/wsclean.py``.

Container images
-------------------

``dosho`` has no image-building infrastructure -- cult-cargo already
solves that problem well, it's just not this repository's job, since
``dosho`` is a cab-schema repo, not an image-building one.
``dosho/images.py`` is the single place image references are pinned,
reusing existing published images; bumping a tool's version is editing
one constant there.

Layout: single-command vs. multi-command tools
--------------------------------------------------

A single-command tool gets its own module exporting one object named
after the tool itself:

.. code-block:: python

    # dosho/cabs/wsclean.py
    wsclean = define_cab("wsclean", "wsclean", images.WSCLEAN, {...})

A multi-command tool (several real sub-commands sharing one binary or
Python package -- CASA tasks, simms) gets one module exporting one
object per sub-command:

.. code-block:: python

    # dosho/cabs/casatasks.py
    @shinobi.pystep(image=images.CASA6)
    def listobs(ctx, vis: Path, listfile: Path) -> ListobsOutputs: ...

    @shinobi.pystep(image=images.CASA6)
    def mstransform(ctx, vis: Path, ...) -> MstransformOutputs: ...

``dosho/cabs/__init__.py`` re-exports every tool-level object by name, so
``from dosho.cabs import wsclean`` works without knowing the submodule --
see :doc:`../quickstart`.

Two lookup interfaces, one set of objects
---------------------------------------------

``dosho.get(name)``/``dosho.registry`` is the parallel, string-keyed
lookup used by ``ninja cabs list``/``show`` and shinobi's
``shinobi.cabs`` entry-point discovery -- for a caller that only knows
the tool's name at *runtime*. It resolves to the exact same objects the
direct-import path gives you; picking one over the other is purely about
whether the caller knows the name at write-time or run-time.
